Spring Webflux is another way of handling web requests
supported by the Spring Framework.
And in order to understand its purpose,
we first need to understand something called reactive programming.
Reactive programming is a declarative programming paradigm concerned
with data streams and the propagation of change.
So in other words,
it's a way of programming that focuses on streams of data and how they change.
And the key idea behind reactive programming is that you
react to change rather than wait for change.
As I mentioned before,
Spring's reactive web programming framework is call Spring Webflux,
and its primary purpose is still to handle web requests,
but the way in which it handles them is different.
Specifically, web requests are executed asynchronously,
and they don't block or wait, and this results in better resource utilization.
To better understand, let's look at what a traditional,
or non-reactive request flow looks like.
As a web request progresses over time,
you can think of it as executing a series of steps,
and some of those steps may depend on external resources like loading a file
from disk or making additional requests to other servers,
and since the requests must occur in order,
every time a step is waiting on something else,
the request is considered to be blocked.
And this is less than ideal because when the request is blocked,
computing resources are tied up and they can't be used to serve other requests.
To sort of relate this to a real-life concept,
the traditional flow is a lot like dialing a support number and
having to wait until the next agent is available.
While you're on hold, you're basically tied up from doing anything else.
Now let's talk about the flow of a reactive request.
Just like the traditional flow,
you can think of the web request as progressing over time and executing a
series of steps that may depend on external resources.
The difference comes with how the requests are executed.
Requests are executed asynchronously instead of synchronously,
and they don't block or wait.
This allows the valuable resources involved in the
request handling to be released and reused.
And you're probably wondering though, if it doesn't wait,
then how the heck does it work?
Well, instead of waiting,
the code simply asks to be notified when the operation is complete,
and continues executing other operations.
When it's observed that the operation is complete,
the code can continue executing those subsequent steps.
Again, relating this back to our real-life example,
the reactive flow is a lot like dialing a support number that
allows you to put in your telephone number and receive a call
back when the next agent is available.
Since you're not tied up on the phone waiting for that next available agent,
you're free to do other things until your phone rings.
You can learn more about Spring Webflux with the Pluralsight course, Spring Webflux: Getting Started, by Esteban Herrera.